---
title: "Utilization of Open Source Tools to Advance Mobile Forensic Curriculum Development"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2014-04-03-admi
venue: " Symposium of the Association of Computer Information Science and Engineering Departments at Minority Institutions"
date: 2014-04-06
location: "Westin Virginia Beach Town Center"
---

Today’s rapid advancement in mobile technology and the constant growth of personal information being stored in mobile devices
has revealed the need for mobile forensics and the increasing demand for individuals skilled in mobile forensics investigation.
In order for the forensics community to have advances in the mobile forensics concentration, there is a need to clearly define an
educational agenda for researchers and students. Once a role is clearly outlined, better educational material can be developed
for students.

The vast mobile device market with its large variety of manufactures and architectures has created a problem for advancing
mobile forensics education. Producing clear guidelines for mobile forensic steps and procedures are a challenge because they
have to be tailored differently for almost every mobile device vendor. Compared to the desktop and laptop market, the mobile
market is extremely diverse. We propose that in order to clearly define a mobile forensics agenda, there is a need to develop a
curriculum guide and mobile forensics laboratory assignments that use open source mobile forensics tools. Although there are
many commercial tools available today, they are generally too expensive for students to purchase in order to get hands-on
experience in mobile forensics. The goal of this research effort is to develop laboratory assignments that make use of enough
open source tools to expose students to necessary mobile forensics techniques. This will increase the body of knowledge 
available to the mobile forensics community, validate the use of open source mobile forensics tools for legitimate use in
computer science curriculum, support advancement of mobile forensics education and subsequently prepare students to become
mobile forensics experts for the workforce.

This research addresses the need for mobile forensics educational materials by increasing the availability of resources and giving
students practical mobile forensic experience at an affordable price. Laboratory assignments will be generated based on the
Santoku-Linux, a Linux distribution created specifically for mobile forensics, mobile malware analysis, and mobile security
testing. This version of Linux is dedicated to mobile forensics and will provide students with an open source platform to execute
the real life scenarios that will be presented in the proposed laboratory guide. Santoku-Linux will provide the basic tools to give
students the ability to analyze data, conduct data recovery, and seize digital evidence. In order to validate the usefulness of the
proposed guided laboratory material, experimental trials will be conducted with university students. It is expected that this
research will verify that the Santoku-Linux open source suite is viable for use in mobile forensics curriculum and to address
how to bridge the gaps that are found, if any.

Research of past educational materials in digital and mobile forensics reveals that there is a significant need for this research
and suggests that improvements can be made in mobile forensics’ educational material. Research is currently underway to test
the tools available with the Santoku-Linux suite and to collect and survey a group of additional open source mobile forensic
tools to produce a comprehensive laboratory packet that introduces users to the use and capabilities of these tools. Future work
will add essential documentation for some of these open source tools. The educational materials will be validated and results
will be used to create a guide to learning mobile forensics. Finally, the laboratory assignments will be uploaded to a website
where lab directions can be downloaded for distribution.  
